draft-turner-push-proto.md, before:

---
title: Simply Push Protocol
abbrev: SPP
docname: draft-turner-push-proto-latest
date: 2014
category: std

ipr: pre5378Trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  rfcedstyle: yes
  toc: yes
  tocindent: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  inline: yes
  text-list-symbols: -o*+
author:
 -
       ins: D. Turner
       name: Douglas Turner II
       organization: Mozilla
       email: dougt@mozilla.com

 -
       ins: J. Conlin
       name: JR Conlin
       organization: Mozilla
       email: jrconlin@mozilla.com

 -
       ins: N.  Marathe
       name: Nikhil Marathe
       organization: Mozilla
       email: nmarathe@mozilla.com

normative:
  RFC2119:


--- abstract

This page describes the protocol used for communication by the WebPushServer and
the UserAgent.

--- middle


# Introduction

The WebPush is a simple notification and small data delievery system designed to
be easy to implement, scalable, and robust.  The WebPush protocol enables
application servers to delivery guarantees, minimal server state, and client
driven recovery. It is a signaling and and data carrying system.

# Definitions

{:br: vspace="0"}

WebPushServer
: A publicly accessible server that implements the server side of
the WebPush Protocol and exposes an HTTP API for AppServer's to notify it.

UserAgent
: A device or program that implements the client side of the WebPush Protocol.

UAID
: A globally unique UserAgent ID. Used by the WebPushServer to associate
channelIDs with a client. Stored by the UserAgent, but opaque to it.

Channel
: The flow of information from AppServer through WebPushServer to UserAgent.
ChannelID : Unique identifier for a Channel. Generated by UserAgent for a
particular application. Opaque identifier for both UserAgent and
WebPushServer. This MUST NOT be exposed to an application.

Endpoint
: A REST-ful HTTP URL uniquely associated to a channel. Requests to this URL
should update the WebPushServer state for the channel. MUST be exposed to
applications.

Version
: Monotonically increasing 64-bit integer describing the application state. This
holds meaning as a primary key or similar only to the AppServer. The
WebPushServer and UserAgent and App should use this only for detecting
changes. MUST be exposed to applications.

Application
: A program which requires access to push notifications. The UserAgent acts on
behalf of applications.

{:br}

# Protocol Overview

The WebPush protocol defines how UserAgents and WebPushServers communicate to
ensure reliable delivery of the latest version of a channel from the
WebPushServer to the UserAgent.

The WebPush communication channel is WebSockets, and the wire protocol is
JSON, with messages defined below.  The WebSocket specific HTTP header
`Sec-WebSocket-Protocol` MUST be set to `push-notification` by the
UserAgent. The WebPushServer SHOULD reject the connection if the header is not
set.

All messages MUST use TLS (wss:// protocol for WebSockets). In addition,
Endpoints generated by WebPushServer's MUST use HTTPS URLs.

# Messages

All messages are encoded as JSON. All messages MUST have the following fields:

messageType (string)
: Defines the message type
{: br}

## Handshake

After the WebSocket is established, the UserAgent begins communication by
sending a `hello` message.  The hello message contains the UAID of the UserAgent
has one if, either generated by the UserAgent for the first handshake or returned
by the server from an earlier handshake. The UserAgent also transmits the
channelIDs it knows so the server may synchronize its state.

The server MAY respect this UAID, but it is at liberty to ask the UserAgent to
change its UAID in the response.

If the UserAgent receives a new UAID, it MUST delete all existing channelIDs and
their associated versions. It MAY then wake up all registered applications
immediately or at a later date by sending them a `push-register` message.

The handshake is considered ''complete'', once the UserAgent has received a
reply.

An UserAgent MUST transmit a `hello` message *only once* on its WebSocket.  If
the handshake is not completed in the first try, it MUST disconnect the
WebSocket and begin a new connection.

*NOTE:* Applications may request registrations or unregistrations from the
UserAgent, before or when the handshake is in progress. The UserAgent MAY buffer
these or report errors to the application. But it MUST NOT send these requests
to the WebPushServer until the handshake is completed.

### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

messageType = "hello"

: Begin handshake

uaid string (REQUIRED)

: If the UserAgent has a previously assigned UAID, it should send it. Otherwise
send an empty string.

channelIDs list of strings (REQUIRED)

: If the UserAgent has a list of channelIDs it wants to be notified of, it must
pass these, otherwise an empty list.

{: br}

Extra fields:
The UserAgent MAY pass any extra JSON data to the WebPushServer. This data may
include information required to wake up the UserAgent out-of-band. The
WebPushServer MAY ignore this data.

#### Example

~~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "hello",
    "uaid": "fd52438f-1c49-41e0-a2e4-98e49833cc9c",
    "channelIDs": ["431b4391-c78f-429a-a134-f890b5adc0bb",
                   "a7695fa0-9623-4890-9c08-cce0231e4b36"]
  }
~~~~~

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

WebPushServers MUST only respond to a hello once.
UserAgents MUST ignore multiple hello replies.

messageType = "hello"
: Responses generally have the same messageType as the request

uaid string (REQUIRED)
: If the UserAgent sent no UAID, generate a new one. If the UserAgent send a
valid UAID and the WebPushServer is in sync with the UserAgent, send back the
same UAID, otherwise the WebPushServer should generate a new UAID.

{: br}


#### Example

~~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "hello",
    "uaid": "fd52438f-1c49-41e0-a2e4-98e49833cc9c"
  }
~~~~~

## Register

The Register message is used by the UserAgent to request that the WebPushServer
notify it when a channel changes. Since channelIDs are associated with only one
UAID, this effectively creates the channel, while unregister destroys the
channel.

The channelID is chosen by the UserAgent because it also acts like a nonce for
the Register message itself. Because of this WebPushServers MAY respond out of
order to multiple register messages or messages may be lost without compromising
correctness of the protocol.

The request is considered successful only after a response is received with a
status code of 200.

On success the UserAgent MUST:

* Update its persistent storage based on the response
* Notify the application of a successful registration. 
* On error, the UserAgent MUST notify the application as soon as possible.

NOTE: The register call is made by the UserAgent on behalf of an
application. The UserAgent SHOULD have reasonable timeouts in place so that the
application is not kept waiting for too long if the server does not respond or
the UserAgent has to retry the connection.

### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

;messageType = "register"

;channelID string (REQUIRED)
:A unique identifier generated by the UserAgent, distinct from any existing
channelIDs it has registered. It is RECOMMENDED that this is a UUIDv4 token.

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "register",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd"
  }
~~~~

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

messageType = "register"

channelID string (REQUIRED) 
: This MUST be the same as the channelID sent by the
UserAgent in the register request that this message is a response to.

status number (REQUIRED)
: Used to indicate success/failure. MUST be one of:
* 200 - OK. Success. Idempotent: If the WebPushServer receives a register for the same channelID from a UserAgent which already has a registration for the channelID, it should still respond with success.
* 409 - Conflict. The chosen ChannelID is already in use and NOT associated with this UserAgent. UserAgent SHOULD retry with a new ChannelID as soon as possible.
* 500 - Internal server error. Database out of space or offline. Disk space full or whatever other reason due to which the WebPushServer could not grant this registration. UserAgent SHOULD avoid retrying immediately.

pushEndpoint string (REQUIRED)
: Should be the URL sent to the application by the UserAgent. AppServers will
contact the WebPushServer at this URL to update the version of the channel
identified by channelID.
{: br}

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "register",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd",
    "status": 200,
    "pushEndpoint": "http://pushserver.example.org/d9b74644"
  }
~~~~

## Unregister

Unregistration is an optional procedure.

WebPushServers MUST support it.
UserAgents SHOULD support it.

The unregister is required only between the App and the UserAgent, so that the
UserAgent stops notifying the App when the App is no longer interested in a
pushEndpoint.

The unregister is also useful to the AppServer, because it should stop sending
notifications to an endpoint the App is no longer monitoring. Even then, it is
really an optimization so that the AppServer need not have some sort of garbage
collection mechanism to clean up endpoints at intervals of time.

The WebPushServer MUST implement unregister, but need not rely on it. Well
behaved AppServers will stop notifying it of unregistered endpoints
automatically. Well behaved UserAgents won't notify their apps of unregistered
updates either. So the WebPushServer can continue to process notifications and
pass them on to UserAgents, when it has not been told about the unregistration.

When an App calls `unregister(endpoint)` it is RECOMMENDED that the UserAgent
follow these steps:

* Remove its local registration first, for example from the database.
  This will allow it to immediately start ignoring updates.
* Notify the App that unregistration succeeded.
* Fire off an unregister message to the WebPushServer

### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

messageType = "unregister"

channelID string (REQUIRED)
: This is sort of obvious isn't it? :)
{: br}

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "unregister",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd"
  }
~~~~

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

messageType = "unregister"

channelID string (REQUIRED)
: This MUST be the same as the channelID sent by the UserAgent in the unregister
request that this message is a response to.

status number (REQUIRED)
: Used to indicate success/failure. MUST be one of:
  * 200 - OK. Success. Idempotent: If the WebPushServer receives a unregister for a non-existent channelID it should respond with success. If the channelID is associated with a DIFFERENT UAID, it MUST NOT delete the channelID, but still MUST respond with success to this UserAgent.
* 500 - Internal server error. Database offline or whatever other reason due to which the WebPushServer could not grant this unregistration. UserAgent SHOULD avoid retrying immediately.
{: br}

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "unregister",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd",
    "status": 200
  }
~~~~

## Ping

The connection to the WebPush Server may be lost due to network issues. When the
UserAgent detects loss of network, it should reconnect. There are situations in
which the TCP connection dies without either end discovering it immediately. The
UserAgent should send a ping approximately every 30 minutes andexpect a reply
from the server in a reasonable time (The Mozilla UserAgent uses 10 seconds). If
no data is received, the connection should be presumed closed and a new
connection started.

The UserAgent should consider normal communications as an indication that the
socket is working properly. It SHOULD send the ping packet only if no activity
has occurred in the past 30 minutes.

#### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

The 2-character string `{}` is sent. This is a valid JSON object that requires
no alternative processing on the server, while keeping transmission size small.

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

The WebPushServer may reply with any data. The UserAgent is only concerned about
the state of the connection. The WebPushServer may deliver pending notifications
or other information. If there is no pending information to be sent, it is
RECOMMENDED that the WebPushServer also reply with the string `{}`.

## Notification

### AppServer -> WebPushServer

The AppServer MUST make a HTTP *PUT* request to the Endpoint received from the
App.

If no request body is present, the server MAY presume the version to be the
current server UTC.

If the request body is present, the request MUST contain the string "version=N"
and the Content-Type MUST be `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`.

Authentication is optional.

### WebPushServer -> AppServer

The HTTP response status code indicates if the request was successful.

* 200 - OK. The WebPushServer will attempt to deliver a notification to the associated UserAgent.
* 500 - Something went wrong with the server. Rare, but the AppServer should try again.

The HTTP response body SHOULD be empty.

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

Notifications are *acknowledged* by the UserAgent.  WebPushServers should retry
unacknowledged notifications every 60 seconds.  If the version of an
unacknowledged notification is updated, the WebPushServer MAY queue up a new
notification for this channelID and the new version, and remove the old
notification from the pending queue.

messageType: "notification"

updates list  REQUIRED
: The list contains one or more {"channelID": "id", "version": N } pairs.
{: br}

##### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "notification",
    "updates": [
      { "channelID": "431b4391-c78f-429a-a134-f890b5adc0bb",
        "version": 23,
        "data": "" },
      { "channelID": "a7695fa0-9623-4890-9c08-cce0231e4b36",
        "version": 42,
        "data": "Make the Internet work better" } ]
  }
~~~~

#### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

It is RECOMMENDED that the UserAgent try to batch all pending acknowledgements
into fewer messages.

messageType ="ack"

updates list
: The list contains one or more {"channelID": channelID, "version": N} pairs.
{: br}

[TODO]
 -- ack does not require DATA response!

##### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "ack",
    "updates": [
       { "channelID": "431b4391-c78f-429a-a134-f890b5adc0bb",
         "version": 23 },
       { "channelID": "a7695fa0-9623-4890-9c08-cce0231e4b36",
         "version": 42 } ]
  }
~~~~

# Synchronization of server and client state

# Achieving reliable delivery

At any time, if the WebPushServer reaches an inconsistent condition, due to
database failure, network failure, or any other reason, it MAY drop all
state. It MUST then disconnect all active clients, forcing them to reconnect and
begin a handshake to get synchronized.

# Garbage collection

The WebPushServer MAY perform occasional garbage collection to reduce its
disk/memory usage.  UserAgents that have not contacted the WebPushServer for a
long period of time are eligible for garbage collection.  To do this, the
WebPushServer simply deletes the UAID and all associated ChannelIDs and other
associated data (including versions and Endpoints).  The deletion of the UAID
should be done first, and ''atomically''. Other details may be deleted when the
server has spare cycles. Now if the UserAgent with said UAID connects to the
WebPushServer, it will be assigned a new UAID, the handshake will occur and Apps
on the server will learn the latest version.

The WebPushServer MUST NOT delete channelIDs without deleting the associated
UAID, except when one of the following occurs:

* The UserAgent explicitly sends an unregister message.
* or, When a previously known UserAgent reconnects, in the handshake it will
  transmit channelIDs which are registered on the UserAgent's side. If the
  WebPushServer finds that it has registrations for channelIDs that are not in
  the list transmitted by the UserAgent, it may delete these extra channelIDs.

# Alternative communication

In environments or devices where maintaining an always alive WebSocket is
difficult, UserAgents and WebPushServers MAY implement alternative means to
notify UserAgents about updates. This out of band notification SHOULD be
restricted to request the UserAgent to establish the WebSocket. WebPush state
SHOULD NOT be transmitted out of band, since reliable delivery may not be
guaranteed.


# Security Considerations

[TODO]


# IANA Considerations

[TODO]
--- back

Commit message:

Add optional redirect from hello

draft-turner-push-proto.md, after:

---
title: Simply Push Protocol
abbrev: SPP
docname: draft-turner-push-proto-latest
date: 2014
category: std

ipr: pre5378Trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  rfcedstyle: yes
  toc: yes
  tocindent: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  inline: yes
  text-list-symbols: -o*+
author:
 -
       ins: D. Turner
       name: Douglas Turner II
       organization: Mozilla
       email: dougt@mozilla.com

 -
       ins: J. Conlin
       name: JR Conlin
       organization: Mozilla
       email: jrconlin@mozilla.com

 -
       ins: N.  Marathe
       name: Nikhil Marathe
       organization: Mozilla
       email: nmarathe@mozilla.com

normative:
  RFC2119:


--- abstract

This page describes the protocol used for communication by the WebPushServer and
the UserAgent.

--- middle


# Introduction

The WebPush is a simple notification and small data delievery system designed to
be easy to implement, scalable, and robust.  The WebPush protocol enables
application servers to delivery guarantees, minimal server state, and client
driven recovery. It is a signaling and and data carrying system.

# Definitions

{:br: vspace="0"}

WebPushServer
: A publicly accessible server that implements the server side of
the WebPush Protocol and exposes an HTTP API for AppServer's to notify it.

UserAgent
: A device or program that implements the client side of the WebPush Protocol.

UAID
: A globally unique UserAgent ID. Used by the WebPushServer to associate
channelIDs with a client. Stored by the UserAgent, but opaque to it.

Channel
: The flow of information from AppServer through WebPushServer to UserAgent.
ChannelID : Unique identifier for a Channel. Generated by UserAgent for a
particular application. Opaque identifier for both UserAgent and
WebPushServer. This MUST NOT be exposed to an application.

Endpoint
: A REST-ful HTTP URL uniquely associated to a channel. Requests to this URL
should update the WebPushServer state for the channel. MUST be exposed to
applications.

Version
: Monotonically increasing 64-bit integer describing the application state. This
holds meaning as a primary key or similar only to the AppServer. The
WebPushServer and UserAgent and App should use this only for detecting
changes. MUST be exposed to applications.

Application
: A program which requires access to push notifications. The UserAgent acts on
behalf of applications.

{:br}

# Protocol Overview

The WebPush protocol defines how UserAgents and WebPushServers communicate to
ensure reliable delivery of the latest version of a channel from the
WebPushServer to the UserAgent.

The WebPush communication channel is WebSockets, and the wire protocol is
JSON, with messages defined below.  The WebSocket specific HTTP header
`Sec-WebSocket-Protocol` MUST be set to `push-notification` by the
UserAgent. The WebPushServer SHOULD reject the connection if the header is not
set.

All messages MUST use TLS (wss:// protocol for WebSockets). In addition,
Endpoints generated by WebPushServer's MUST use HTTPS URLs.

# Messages

All messages are encoded as JSON. All messages MUST have the following fields:

messageType (string)
: Defines the message type
{: br}

## Handshake

After the WebSocket is established, the UserAgent begins communication by
sending a `hello` message.  The hello message contains the UAID of the UserAgent
has one if, either generated by the UserAgent for the first handshake or returned
by the server from an earlier handshake. The UserAgent also transmits the
channelIDs it knows so the server may synchronize its state.

The server MAY respect this UAID, but it is at liberty to ask the UserAgent to
change its UAID in the response.

If the UserAgent receives a new UAID, it MUST delete all existing channelIDs and
their associated versions. It MAY then wake up all registered applications
immediately or at a later date by sending them a `push-register` message.

The handshake is considered ''complete'', once the UserAgent has received a
reply.

An UserAgent MUST transmit a `hello` message *only once* on its WebSocket.  If
the handshake is not completed in the first try, it MUST disconnect the
WebSocket and begin a new connection.

*NOTE:* Applications may request registrations or unregistrations from the
UserAgent, before or when the handshake is in progress. The UserAgent MAY buffer
these or report errors to the application. But it MUST NOT send these requests
to the WebPushServer until the handshake is completed.

### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

messageType = "hello"

: Begin handshake

uaid string (REQUIRED)

: If the UserAgent has a previously assigned UAID, it should send it. Otherwise
send an empty string.

channelIDs list of strings (REQUIRED)

: If the UserAgent has a list of channelIDs it wants to be notified of, it must
pass these, otherwise an empty list.

{: br}

Extra fields:
The UserAgent MAY pass any extra JSON data to the WebPushServer. This data may
include information required to wake up the UserAgent out-of-band. The
WebPushServer MAY ignore this data.

#### Example

~~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "hello",
    "uaid": "fd52438f-1c49-41e0-a2e4-98e49833cc9c",
    "channelIDs": ["431b4391-c78f-429a-a134-f890b5adc0bb",
                   "a7695fa0-9623-4890-9c08-cce0231e4b36"]
  }
~~~~~

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

WebPushServers MUST only respond to a hello once.
UserAgents MUST ignore multiple hello replies.

messageType = "hello"
: Responses generally have the same messageType as the request

uaid string (REQUIRED)
: If the UserAgent sent no UAID, generate a new one. If the UserAgent send a
valid UAID and the WebPushServer is in sync with the UserAgent, send back the
same UAID, otherwise the WebPushServer should generate a new UAID.

redirect string (OPTIONAL)

: The WebPushServer may optionally request that the UserAgent reconnect to a
different URL.  The UserAgent MUST disconnect on receiving this command and try
reconnecting to the associated URL.

[todo] what kind of restrictions do we want to put on the redirect
 
{: br}


#### Example

~~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "hello",
    "uaid": "fd52438f-1c49-41e0-a2e4-98e49833cc9c"
  }
~~~~~

## Register

The Register message is used by the UserAgent to request that the WebPushServer
notify it when a channel changes. Since channelIDs are associated with only one
UAID, this effectively creates the channel, while unregister destroys the
channel.

The channelID is chosen by the UserAgent because it also acts like a nonce for
the Register message itself. Because of this WebPushServers MAY respond out of
order to multiple register messages or messages may be lost without compromising
correctness of the protocol.

The request is considered successful only after a response is received with a
status code of 200.

On success the UserAgent MUST:

* Update its persistent storage based on the response
* Notify the application of a successful registration. 
* On error, the UserAgent MUST notify the application as soon as possible.

NOTE: The register call is made by the UserAgent on behalf of an
application. The UserAgent SHOULD have reasonable timeouts in place so that the
application is not kept waiting for too long if the server does not respond or
the UserAgent has to retry the connection.

### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

;messageType = "register"

;channelID string (REQUIRED)
:A unique identifier generated by the UserAgent, distinct from any existing
channelIDs it has registered. It is RECOMMENDED that this is a UUIDv4 token.

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "register",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd"
  }
~~~~

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

messageType = "register"

channelID string (REQUIRED) 
: This MUST be the same as the channelID sent by the
UserAgent in the register request that this message is a response to.

status number (REQUIRED)
: Used to indicate success/failure. MUST be one of:
* 200 - OK. Success. Idempotent: If the WebPushServer receives a register for the same channelID from a UserAgent which already has a registration for the channelID, it should still respond with success.
* 409 - Conflict. The chosen ChannelID is already in use and NOT associated with this UserAgent. UserAgent SHOULD retry with a new ChannelID as soon as possible.
* 500 - Internal server error. Database out of space or offline. Disk space full or whatever other reason due to which the WebPushServer could not grant this registration. UserAgent SHOULD avoid retrying immediately.

pushEndpoint string (REQUIRED)
: Should be the URL sent to the application by the UserAgent. AppServers will
contact the WebPushServer at this URL to update the version of the channel
identified by channelID.
{: br}

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "register",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd",
    "status": 200,
    "pushEndpoint": "http://pushserver.example.org/d9b74644"
  }
~~~~

## Unregister

Unregistration is an optional procedure.

WebPushServers MUST support it.
UserAgents SHOULD support it.

The unregister is required only between the App and the UserAgent, so that the
UserAgent stops notifying the App when the App is no longer interested in a
pushEndpoint.

The unregister is also useful to the AppServer, because it should stop sending
notifications to an endpoint the App is no longer monitoring. Even then, it is
really an optimization so that the AppServer need not have some sort of garbage
collection mechanism to clean up endpoints at intervals of time.

The WebPushServer MUST implement unregister, but need not rely on it. Well
behaved AppServers will stop notifying it of unregistered endpoints
automatically. Well behaved UserAgents won't notify their apps of unregistered
updates either. So the WebPushServer can continue to process notifications and
pass them on to UserAgents, when it has not been told about the unregistration.

When an App calls `unregister(endpoint)` it is RECOMMENDED that the UserAgent
follow these steps:

* Remove its local registration first, for example from the database.
  This will allow it to immediately start ignoring updates.
* Notify the App that unregistration succeeded.
* Fire off an unregister message to the WebPushServer

### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

messageType = "unregister"

channelID string (REQUIRED)
: This is sort of obvious isn't it? :)
{: br}

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "unregister",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd"
  }
~~~~

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

messageType = "unregister"

channelID string (REQUIRED)
: This MUST be the same as the channelID sent by the UserAgent in the unregister
request that this message is a response to.

status number (REQUIRED)
: Used to indicate success/failure. MUST be one of:
  * 200 - OK. Success. Idempotent: If the WebPushServer receives a unregister for a non-existent channelID it should respond with success. If the channelID is associated with a DIFFERENT UAID, it MUST NOT delete the channelID, but still MUST respond with success to this UserAgent.
* 500 - Internal server error. Database offline or whatever other reason due to which the WebPushServer could not grant this unregistration. UserAgent SHOULD avoid retrying immediately.
{: br}

#### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "unregister",
    "channelID": "d9b74644-4f97-46aa-b8fa-9393985cd6cd",
    "status": 200
  }
~~~~

## Ping

The connection to the WebPush Server may be lost due to network issues. When the
UserAgent detects loss of network, it should reconnect. There are situations in
which the TCP connection dies without either end discovering it immediately. The
UserAgent should send a ping approximately every 30 minutes andexpect a reply
from the server in a reasonable time (The Mozilla UserAgent uses 10 seconds). If
no data is received, the connection should be presumed closed and a new
connection started.

The UserAgent should consider normal communications as an indication that the
socket is working properly. It SHOULD send the ping packet only if no activity
has occurred in the past 30 minutes.

#### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

The 2-character string `{}` is sent. This is a valid JSON object that requires
no alternative processing on the server, while keeping transmission size small.

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

The WebPushServer may reply with any data. The UserAgent is only concerned about
the state of the connection. The WebPushServer may deliver pending notifications
or other information. If there is no pending information to be sent, it is
RECOMMENDED that the WebPushServer also reply with the string `{}`.

## Notification

### AppServer -> WebPushServer

The AppServer MUST make a HTTP *PUT* request to the Endpoint received from the
App.

If no request body is present, the server MAY presume the version to be the
current server UTC.

If the request body is present, the request MUST contain the string "version=N"
and the Content-Type MUST be `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`.

Authentication is optional.

### WebPushServer -> AppServer

The HTTP response status code indicates if the request was successful.

* 200 - OK. The WebPushServer will attempt to deliver a notification to the associated UserAgent.
* 500 - Something went wrong with the server. Rare, but the AppServer should try again.

The HTTP response body SHOULD be empty.

### WebPushServer -> UserAgent

Notifications are *acknowledged* by the UserAgent.  WebPushServers should retry
unacknowledged notifications every 60 seconds.  If the version of an
unacknowledged notification is updated, the WebPushServer MAY queue up a new
notification for this channelID and the new version, and remove the old
notification from the pending queue.

messageType: "notification"

updates list  REQUIRED
: The list contains one or more {"channelID": "id", "version": N } pairs.
{: br}

##### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "notification",
    "updates": [
      { "channelID": "431b4391-c78f-429a-a134-f890b5adc0bb",
        "version": 23,
        "data": "" },
      { "channelID": "a7695fa0-9623-4890-9c08-cce0231e4b36",
        "version": 42,
        "data": "Make the Internet work better" } ]
  }
~~~~

#### UserAgent -> WebPushServer

It is RECOMMENDED that the UserAgent try to batch all pending acknowledgements
into fewer messages.

messageType ="ack"

updates list
: The list contains one or more {"channelID": channelID, "version": N} pairs.
{: br}

[TODO]
 -- ack does not require DATA response!

##### Example

~~~~
  {
    "messageType": "ack",
    "updates": [
       { "channelID": "431b4391-c78f-429a-a134-f890b5adc0bb",
         "version": 23 },
       { "channelID": "a7695fa0-9623-4890-9c08-cce0231e4b36",
         "version": 42 } ]
  }
~~~~

# Synchronization of server and client state

# Achieving reliable delivery

At any time, if the WebPushServer reaches an inconsistent condition, due to
database failure, network failure, or any other reason, it MAY drop all
state. It MUST then disconnect all active clients, forcing them to reconnect and
begin a handshake to get synchronized.

# Garbage collection

The WebPushServer MAY perform occasional garbage collection to reduce its
disk/memory usage.  UserAgents that have not contacted the WebPushServer for a
long period of time are eligible for garbage collection.  To do this, the
WebPushServer simply deletes the UAID and all associated ChannelIDs and other
associated data (including versions and Endpoints).  The deletion of the UAID
should be done first, and ''atomically''. Other details may be deleted when the
server has spare cycles. Now if the UserAgent with said UAID connects to the
WebPushServer, it will be assigned a new UAID, the handshake will occur and Apps
on the server will learn the latest version.

The WebPushServer MUST NOT delete channelIDs without deleting the associated
UAID, except when one of the following occurs:

* The UserAgent explicitly sends an unregister message.
* or, When a previously known UserAgent reconnects, in the handshake it will
  transmit channelIDs which are registered on the UserAgent's side. If the
  WebPushServer finds that it has registrations for channelIDs that are not in
  the list transmitted by the UserAgent, it may delete these extra channelIDs.

# Alternative communication

In environments or devices where maintaining an always alive WebSocket is
difficult, UserAgents and WebPushServers MAY implement alternative means to
notify UserAgents about updates. This out of band notification SHOULD be
restricted to request the UserAgent to establish the WebSocket. WebPush state
SHOULD NOT be transmitted out of band, since reliable delivery may not be
guaranteed.


# Security Considerations

[TODO]


# IANA Considerations

[TODO]
--- back
